Metadata to encode lossy compression (by quantization) with @cofinoa (#519)
cf-convention/cf-conventions: ch08.adoc

(Quantization of integer types, although theoretically allowed, is not covered by this convention.)
The quantized results are valid [<<IEEE_754>>] values---no special software or decoder is necessary to read them.
Importantly, the quantized bits compress more efficiently than random bits.
Thus quantization is sometimes referred to as a form of lossy compression although, strictly speaking, quantization only pre-conditions data for more efficient compression by a subsequent compressor.

The CF conventions of this section define a metadata framework to record quantization properties alongside quantized floating-point data variables.
The goals are twofold.
First, to inform interested users how, and to what degree, the quantized data differ from the original unquantized data, which are not stored in the dataset and may no longer exist.
Second, to provide the necessary provenance metadata for users to reproduce the data transformations on the same or other raw data.
These conventions also allow users to better understand the precision that data producers expect from source models or measurements.

> Use of these conventions ensures that all quantized variables are clearly marked as such, and thus alerts users to cases where these guidelines have not been followed.

Author: I intended the second phrase of the last sentence, "Use of these conventions ensures that all quantized variables are clearly marked as such, **and thus alerts users to cases where these guidelines have not been followed**." to convey that since all quantized variables must be marked as such, it will be easier for users to identify cases where the dataset producers inadvertently quantized variable that should not be quantized, e.g., non-data variables, coordinate variables or formula terms variables. In practice, it is easy to quantize every floating point variable in a dataset, and what is hard is to refrain from quantizing variables that should not be quantized. (And to refrain from quantizing _FillValue, for that matter). However, since all quantized variables will be annotated as such, then discerning users should be able to recognize that unexpected problems using the data might arise from prohibited quantization of protected variables. That is the intent.
Our options include removing the second phrase (in bold), leaving it as is, or changing it to clarify the intent. What do you suggest?

> Use of these conventions ensures that all quantized variables are clearly marked as such, and thus alerts users to cases where these guidelines have not been followed.

Reviewer: Thanks - I see where you're going now! However, I still don't think we need this sentence :). This is because this it is an error for which the resolution is unclear. Do you (Does your software library) ignore quantization information on a coordinate variable and carry on using the dataset assuming that the coordinates are un-quantized?, or do you stop using the dataset because the coordinates are wrong? There's no right answer! In any event, the canonical way to tell if the file non-conformant is a cf-checker, which will always raise an error for this case.

> Use of these conventions ensures that all quantized variables are clearly marked as such, and thus alerts users to cases where these guidelines have not been followed.

Author: If a dataset attempts to be CF compliant but fails because the creator inadvertently quantized a coordinate variable, the CF metadata might alert the user to the issue (that the coordinate is quantized). Most geoscientists never have nor ever will use a CF checker. The convention gives them a better chance to see potential issues. Perhaps you're right, it's pretty "meta" so I'll take out the last sentence.

> These conventions must not be used with data variables of integer type, or any other kind of CF variable.

Author: At first I really liked this suggestion because it improve clarity and is more precise. However, it also may be too broad in a sense illustrated by the ancillary_variables in CF example 3.3. Would your suggested wording proscribe quantizing the data variable `q_error_limit` because it is referenced (as an `ancillary_variable`) by the `q` variable? If the dataset producer decides to quantize `q` (which seems reasonable), then it makes sense to me to allow quantizing other data variables like `q_error_limit` that are inherently known to the same precision as `q`. Thoughts?

> These conventions must not be used with data variables of integer type, or any other kind of CF variable.

Reviewer: Good point. I don't think we want to prevent quantization of ancillary variables. We could instead say

> These conventions must only be used with variables of floating-point type that are not part of a domain defined by a domain variable (<\<domain-variables\>>) or data variable, i.e. are not acting as coordinates (of any type), cell measures, nor are terms in the definition of a parametric vertical coordinate (<\<parametric-vertical-coordinate\>>).

> These conventions must not be used with data variables of integer type, or any other kind of CF variable.

Author: I'm glad you agree that `ancillary_variables` is too broad of a class to rule out from potential quantization. Your suggested replacement sentence might be OK. However, it's hard for me to parse and I do not understand the logic of excluding variables that belong to a domain from being quantized. (NB: I just learned about domain variables today so I do not understand them that well). I agree that coordinate (of any type) variables that define a domain should never be quantized. Is that what you mean by variables that are "part of a domain"? To me "variables that are part of a domain" naturally includes data variables that occupy the domain, and I do not see the logic in proscribing quantization of these data variables. Please explain your reasoning or suggest a rewording that allows data variables in a domain to be quantized. Or are data variables and domain variables mutually exclusive so "data variables in a domain" is oxymoronic?

> These conventions must not be used with data variables of integer type, or any other kind of CF variable.

Author: @davidhassell When you have time please respond to above question.

This is because fields that describe idealized or reference coordinate grids, or grid transformations, are often known to the highest precision possible.
These fields can include spatial and temporal coordinate variables (e.g., **`latitude`**, **`longitude`**, **`level`**, **`time`**) and properties derived from these coordinates (e.g., **`area`**, **`volume`**).
Degrading the precision of such grid properties may have unintended side effects on the accuracy of subsequent operations such regridding, interpolation, and conservation checks which should generally be performed with the highest precision possible.

> For the same reason, it is recommended not to quantize any data variable which is referenced by a **`formula_terms`** attribute of any variable.

Author: Note to self, replace "such" by "such as"

> For the same reason, it is recommended not to quantize any data variable which is referenced by a **`formula_terms`** attribute of any variable.

Author: The removal of the `formula_terms` sentence depends on the resolution of the `ancillary_variables` question

> For the same reason, it is recommended not to quantize any data variable which is referenced by a **`formula_terms`** attribute of any variable.

Author: @davidhassell Why do you recommend removing this sentence "For the same reason..."? I think it flows well with the preceding sentence. Do you consider it too repetitive with the full proscription in Line 696 (current involving domain variables) that we are discussing above? Or..?

The BitGroom, Granular BitGroom, and DigitRound algorithms guarantee preservation of a specified number of significant digits (NSD) in base 10 representation.
The actual number of mantissa bits quantized depends on the algorithm.
Thus all data variables quantized by BitGroom, Granular BitGroom, or DigitRound must have a corresponding attribute **`quantization_nsd`**.
The value of **`quantization_nsd`** is an integer with **`1 \<= NSD \<= 7`** for data type **`float`** or **`real`**, and **`1 \<= NSD \<= 15`** for data type **`double`**.

[[example-quantization-nsb-libnetcdf]]
[caption="Example 8.8. "]
.Quantization performed by BitRound algorithm in libnetcdf
====
----
  variables:
    char quantization_info ;
      quantization_info:algorithm = "bitround" ;
      quantization_info:implementation = "libnetcdf version 4.9.2" ;

    float ps(time,lat,lon) ;
      ps:_QuantizeBitRoundNumberOfSignificantBits = 9 ;
      ps:quantization = "quantization_info" ;
      ps:quantization_nsb = 9 ;
      ps:standard_name = "surface_air_pressure" ;
      ps:units = "Pa" ;
----

> Note how the same NSB is reported in two attributes of the data variable **`ps`**. The quantization variable (**`quantization_info`**) **`implementation`** attribute reveals that the netCDF library applied the BitRound algorithm. The netCDF library wrote the system-defined **`_QuantizeBitRoundNumberOfSignificantBits`** attribute [<<NetCDF>>] which contains the same parameter value as the CF **`quantization_nsb`** attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note how the same NSB is reported in two attributes of the data variable **`ps`**.
The quantization variable (**`quantization_info`**) **`implementation`** attribute reveals that the netCDF library applied the BitRound algorithm.
The netCDF library wrote the system-defined **`_QuantizeBitRoundNumberOfSignificantBits`** attribute <<NetCDF>> which contains the same parameter value as the CF **`quantization_nsb`** attribute (see the main text for further details).
```

====

[[example-quantization-nsd-multiple-variables-nco]]
[caption="Example 8.9. "]
.Quantization performed by Granular BitGroom algorithm in NCO
====
Quantization of different variables to different levels often makes good scientific sense. Here the pressure variable **`ps`** has four significant digits of precision while the temperature variable **`ts`** retains only three significant digits. 
----
  variables:
    char quantization_info ;
      quantization_info:algorithm = "granular_bitround" ;
      quantization_info:implementation = "NCO version 5.2.7" ;

    float ps(time,lat,lon) ;
      ps:standard_name = "surface_air_pressure" ;
      ps:units = "Pa" ;
      ps:quantization = "quantization_info" ;
      ps:quantization_nsd = 4 ;

    float ts(time) ;
      ts:standard_name = "surface_temperature" ;
      ts:units = "K" ;
      ts:quantization = "quantization_info" ;
      ts:quantization_nsd = 3 ;
----

> Both variables were quantized by the same algorithm and so utilize the same quantization variable. **`quantization_info`** reveals that the Granular BitRound algorithm in NCO performed the quantization. Since the netCDF library did not perform the quantization, there is no system-defined long quantization attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both variables were quantized by the same algorithm and so utilize the same quantization variable.
**`quantization_info`** reveals that the Granular BitRound algorithm in NCO performed the quantization.
Since the netCDF library did not perform the quantization, there is no system-defined underscored quantization attribute.
```

====

[[quantization-algorithms-description, Section 8.4.3, "Description of Quantization Algorithms"]]
==== Description of quantization algorithms

This section briefly describes and contrasts each recognized **`quantize`** algorithm and points to further documentation.

> BitRound is also called the "round-to-nearest" method [<<KRD21>>] and the "half-to-even" method [<<Kou21>>].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BitRound is also called the "round-to-nearest" method <<KRD21>> and the "half-to-even" method <<Kou21>>.
```

> This is the default [<<IEEE_754>>] rounding method and is bias-free and conservative for random distributions of numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the default <<IEEE_754>> rounding method and is bias-free and conservative for random distributions of numbers.
```

BitRound is preferred when the number of significant bits (NSB) to retain is known.

The other **`quantize`** algorithms guarantee to preserve a given number of significant (base-10 representation) digits (NSD).

> Their quantization errors never exceed half of the unit value at the NSD decimal place [<<Zen16>>].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Their quantization errors never exceed half of the unit value at the NSD decimal place <<Zen16>>.
```

> Their quantization errors never exceed half of the unit value at the NSD decimal place [<<Zen16>>].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Their quantization errors never exceed half of the unit value at the NSD decimal place <<Zen16>>.
```

> BitGroom [<<Zen16>>] appeared first, though is now known to be suboptimal in accuracy [<<Kou21>>] and in compressibility compared to later methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BitGroom <<Zen16>> appeared first, though is now known to be suboptimal in accuracy <<Kou21>> and in compressibility compared to later methods.
```

> DigitRound [<<DCG19>>] has superior compressibility for a given NSD compared to BitGroom.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DigitRound <<DCG19>> has superior compressibility for a given NSD compared to BitGroom.
```

Granular BitGroom combines the DigitRound approach for compressibility with the BitRound approach for quantization.
Granular BitGroom and DigitRound are both good choices when the NSD to retain is known.

The netCDF C and Fortran libraries can directly invoke BitRound, BitGroom, and Granular BitRound [<<NetCDF>>].
The netCDF library attaches a long, system-defined attribute to every data variable that it quantizes, such as 

> **`_QuantizeBitRoundNumberOfSignificantBits = 9`** in Example 8.8.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**`_QuantizeBitRoundNumberOfSignificantBits = 9`** in <<example-quantization-nsb-libnetcdf>>.
```

> The leading underscore indicates that the netCDF library wrote this attribute [<<NUG>>].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The leading underscore indicates that the netCDF library wrote this attribute <<NUG>>.
```

> Any data variable that has the library-defined attribute should, in addition, contain the corresponding CF metadata.

Reviewer: I think we must "must" this, to avoid a possible ambiguity.
```suggestion
Any variable that has the library-defined attribute must, in addition, contain the corresponding CF metadata.
```
